---
layout: post
title: "Symmetries between sine and cosine"
date: 2022-06-04T13:00:00-04:00
description: "Cool geometric and algebraic symmetries. Several embedded Desmos graphs."
categories: act
tags: math
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: true
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

## Geometry

We must start with the most basic definition.

### Lemma 1: Basic definitions in right triangle

In a right triangle, given angle $$\theta$$, $$\sin \theta = \frac{\text{opposite}}{\text{hypotenuse}}$$ and $$\cos \theta = \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{hypotenuse}}$$

But it's definitely best to visualize:

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/act/sin-cos/sincos-definition.jpg" title="Basic geometric definition of sine and cosine" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" center=1 %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="caption">Basic geometric definition of sine and cosine</div>

From the definitions, we get that the green side is $$h\cos \theta$$ because $$\cos \theta = \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{hypotenuse}} \implies \text{adjacent} = h\cos \theta$$. Similarly, the blue side is $$h\sin \theta$$. Letting $$h=1$$, the adjacent side is just $$\cos \theta$$, and the opposite side is $$\sin \theta$$. With this setup, we can show **Lemma 2**.

### Lemma 2: 90° separation

$$
\cos \theta = \sin(\frac{\pi}{2} - \theta)$$ and $$\sin \theta = \cos(\frac{\pi}{2} - \theta)$$ for arbitrary $$\theta
$$

*Proof*. Consider $$\alpha=\frac{\pi}{2}-\theta$$. In the triangle with hypotenuse 1, the green side is $$\cos \theta = \frac{\text{adjacent}}{1}$$. It is also $$\sin \alpha = \frac{\text{opposite}}{1}$$. Hence, $$\cos \theta = \sin(\frac{\pi}{2} - \theta)$$. Similar reasoning holds for the latter identity and for arbitrary $$h$$.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/act/sin-cos/sincos-identity-90.jpg" title="Geometric proof of separation by 90 degrees" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" center=1 %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="caption">Geometric proof of separation by 90 degrees</div>

Here's a Desmos graph where you can see the identity for yourself: [^1]

<p align="center">
<iframe class="center" src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/csddcvviru" style="border:0px #ffffff none;"
name="myiFrame" scrolling="no" frameborder="1" marginheight="0px" marginwidth="0px" height="400px" width="600px"
allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>

[^1]: You can press the ▶️ on the left to view the animation.

Back to **Lemma 1**, why should the basic definition be limited to a static right triangle? What about a dynamic right triangle, perhaps one like this: [^2]

<p align="center">
<iframe class="center" src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/ko2y1gnr7d" style="border:0px #ffffff none;"
name="myiFrame" scrolling="no" frameborder="1" marginheight="0px" marginwidth="0px" height="400px" width="600px"
allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>

[^2]: Note that there is no magic going on here. There's nothing in Desmos that specifically generates an arbitrary right triangle - this graph uses only the sine and cosine knowledge shown above!

In this graph, the x coordinates always involve $$\cos \theta$$, and the y coordinates always involve $$\sin \theta$$. Thinking of the black line as a vector [^3], we see that to get the horizontal component of the vector, we multiply its length by $$\cos \theta$$. To get its vertical component, we multiply its length by $$\sin \theta$$. In other words, $$\cos \theta$$ projects to $$x$$, and $$\sin \theta$$ projects to $$y$$.

[^3]: Since we can vary its length $$r$$ and its angle $$t$$

This applies to the graph of a circle as well. Note that, again, $$x$$ always goes with $$\cos \theta$$, and $$y$$ always goes with $$\sin \theta$$.

<p align="center">
<iframe class="center" src="https://www.desmos.com/calculator/jwpjnk3tqk" style="border:0px #ffffff none;"
name="myiFrame" scrolling="no" frameborder="1" marginheight="0px" marginwidth="0px" height="400px" width="600px"
allowfullscreen></iframe>
</p>

To make this idea even more clear, you should take a look at this [unit circle animation on Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/computer-programming/circle/4597064320155648).

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/act/sin-cos/sincos-animation.jpg" title="A still screenshot of unit circle animation on Khan Academy" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" center=1 %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="caption">A still screenshot of <a href="https://www.khanacademy.org/computer-programming/circle/4597064320155648">unit circle animation</a> from Khan Academy</div>

## Algebra

There is an algebraic symmetry that is, in my opinion, as beautiful as the symmetries above. This symmetry also allows us to prove [$$e^{ix} = \cos x + i\sin x$$](../eulers-formula/) for any $$x$$.

### Lemma 3: Sine and cosine series expansions

$$
\cos x = 1 - \frac{x^2}{2} + \frac{x^4}{4!} - \frac{x^6}{6!} + \cdots$$, and $$\sin x = x - \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^5}{5!} - \frac{x^7}{7!} + \cdots
$$ [^4]

[^4]: Note that the cosine expansion contains only even powers of $$x$$ (including $$x^0 = 1$$) divided by even factorials, and the sine expansion contains only odd powers of $$x$$ divided by odd factorials.

*Proof*. Consider that the [Taylor series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taylor_series) [^5] expansion of $$f(x)$$ about the point $$a$$ is $$f(a)+f'(a)(x-a) + \frac{f''(a)}{2!}(x-a)^2 + \frac{f'''(a)}{3!}(x-a)^3 + \cdots + \frac{f^{(n)}(a)}{n!}(x-a)^n + \cdots$$

The Maclaurin expansion is the Taylor series centered at $$a=0$$, so the Maclaurin expansion of $$f(x)$$ is $$f(0) + f'(0)x + \frac{f''(0)}{2!}x^2 + \frac{f'''(0)}{3!}x^3 + \cdots + \frac{f^{(n)}(0)}{n!}x^n + \cdots$$

Let $$f(x) = \cos x$$. We know that [^6]

$$
\begin{matrix}
    f(x) & = & \cos x\\
    f'(x) & = & -\sin x\\
    f''(x) & = & -\cos x\\
    f'''(x) & = & \sin x\\
    f''''(x) & = & \cos x\\
    \vdots & \vdots & \vdots
\end{matrix}
$$

Using that $$\cos(0) = 1$$ and $$\sin(0) = 0$$, we have that the first few terms of the Maclaurin series are $$1 + 0x -\frac{x^2}{2} + 0x^3 + \frac{x^4}{4!}$$. Now, we write the pattern:

$$
\cos x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{(-1)^n}{2n!} x^{2n}
$$

Any odd power will have $$\sin(0)=0$$ and so can be ignored. Hence, we use only the even numbers $$2n$$ in our summation. Using that $$f(x)=\cos x$$ and $$f''(x) = -\cos x$$, we note that the signs alternate each (even) term, so we also have $$(-1)^n$$ in the summation.

[^5]: I might write an article about the Taylor series! For now, the tl;dr is that the Taylor expansion of a complicated function is a highly accurate approximation that is made up of less complicated polynomial terms, which are much easier to work with.

[^6]: Note here that the cycle length is 4, which is the same as that of the powers of $$i$$. $$1, i, -1, -i, 1, \dots$$

Similar reasoning holds for $$\sin x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{(-1)^n}{(2n+1)!}x^{2n+1}$$.

Lastly, there are also two trigonometric identities that I have always found interesting, in terms of symmetry.

### Lemma 4: Angle sum and difference identities

$$\sin(\alpha + \beta) = \sin(\alpha) \cos(\beta) + \cos(\alpha) \sin(\beta)$$

$$\sin(\alpha - \beta) = \sin(\alpha) \cos(\beta) - \cos(\alpha) \sin(\beta)$$

$$\cos(\alpha + \beta) = \cos(\alpha) \cos(\beta) - \sin(\alpha) \sin(\beta)$$

$$\cos(\alpha - \beta) = \cos(\alpha) \cos(\beta) + \sin(\alpha) \sin(\beta)$$

I won't prove these identities here, but I will write about the symmetries. Note that the $$\sin$$ identities have matching signs; that is, if there is a $$+$$ on the left side, there's a $$+$$ on the right side. However, the multiplications are mismatched in that $$\sin$$ is multiplied by $$\cos$$ and vice versa.

On the other hand, the $$\cos$$ identities have matching multiplication in that $$\cos$$ multiplies $$\cos$$, and $$\sin$$ multiplies $$\sin$$. The signs, however, are mismatched.
